25 Helpful Running Articles You Need To Read
https://tinamuir.com/runners-best-articles/
Many of you are brand new friends. We have not had the years to get to know one another…or you have not learned my rambl-y style of writing yet, and as I hope most people are out enjoying their Monday off work today, I thought I would bring a summary post together for running articles you may have missed if you are a new reader.

If you are new to the running world, or newly addicted, there is SO MUCH OUT THERE in terms of running articles and running tips that you could use to improve your running.

It’s overwhelming.

I feel that way, and I am an experienced runner.

Therefore, I thought it would be helpful to leave you with the 25 posts I think will best serve you on your journey as a runner. You can keep them as a resource, or if you have no interest in running related topics, I will not be offended if you skip on with your day ??

Don’t let weather stop you running
Winter Running Gear- What to Wear at Every Temperature

Secrets of Success- 10 Tips for Running in the Snow

Summer Running- What to Wear at Every Temperature

Train smarter, not harder
Secrets to Success: Dynamic warm up

Get to Know The Effort Scale for Running Success

STOP Looking at Your GPS Watch to Run Faster (& enjoy it more too!)

5 Reasons Why Running Easy is So Hard

Doubt Yourself Before a Race? Read This

7 Ways to Make Sure You Do Not Slow Down in a Race

5 Tips to Get Over Sickness Before Race Day

5 Reasons Why You (Yes, You!) NEED 1-2 Weeks off Running After a Marathon

How to Get Over the Fear of Losing Your Fitness

Why Hills are the Best Workout to Return to Running

12 Ways to Deal With Injury Depression

What a 90 mile Week of Marathon Training Looks Like

What does a runner look like? The “Runners Body”
Being an Athlete vs. Being a Skinny Girl Who Runs

Gained Weight? Me too! Why it is Okay to Indulge

Why We ALL Need to Throw Away the Scale NOW!

Why it is Good to Indulge (& Gain Weight) After a Marathon