Sauber’s calculated risk for 2019
https://www.motorsportmagazine.com/opinion/f1/sauber-s-calculated-risk-2019
Sauber is going to pains to point out that Antonio Giovinazzi is not Marcus Ericsson’s 2019 replacement, but Charles Leclerc’s. Kimi Räikkönen, the team insists, is Ericsson’s replacement.

It’s not just semantics. Giovinazzi is the Ferrari-supplied replacement for the Ferrari-supplied – and now re-assigned – Leclerc. The financial implications that go with running a Ferrari junior driver are significant for Sauber. Kimi Räikkönen was not supplied to Sauber by Ferrari. Even though Ferrari almost certainly helped in the discussions, Räikkönen has been quite explicit in saying the Sauber drive was his initiative; his deal.    

It all makes for an interesting combination of experienced old hand and promising almost-rookie. But that lack of continuity will make it difficult to know just exactly where the 2019 Sauber is at. Wherever it ends up in the competitive hierarchy, there will be questions nagging. If it continues Sauber’s recovery and is more competitive than this year’s car, the questions will be along the lines of: ‘But could it be further up still if, say, Esteban Ocon, was in it?’ Or ‘Where would it be if the still-improving Leclerc were in it?’

If it makes no progress from 2018 or falls back, how do we know if it’s a technical failing or a driver shortfall?

He’s a very different driver to the full-on aggressive charger of his previous season at Sauber, as a rookie in 2001
Definitively, of course, we cannot know. The car and driver combination is final and the engineering staff simply have to work with that. De-coupling one from the other is something even the engineers can only make an informed estimate of.

Both drivers are capable of great performances, but have shown an inconsistent ability to access it. Räikkönen has the reputation as a very good analyst of the car’s behaviour, but needs something quite specific from it in order for his natural driving style to work. The responsive front end that allows him to rotate the car into slow corners with only the minimum of steering lock is a difficult thing to achieve on the sort of hard compound control tyres we’ve had in Formula 1 for many years.

Furthermore, any track that requires a driver to clatter hard over kerbs to shave lap time is not good news for Räikkönen. As one of the most experienced of old hands in the history of the sport, he knows what he needs – and if he gets it he can still look like a convincing facsimile of the great McLaren driver of all those years ago. He’s a very different driver to the full-on aggressive charger of his previous season at Sauber, as a rookie in 2001. But there are those who know him well who are convinced that, free of the peculiar demands made of him as Vettel’s Ferrari partner, a very much invigorated Räikkönen will emerge.  

