The Necessity of Football
https://newrepublic.com/article/124409/necessity-football
One of my earliest assignments as an associate producer at NFL Films, the cinematic and mythmaking arm of professional football, was to splice together montages of the best plays, catches, bloopers, and hits from the week’s games, and synchronize them to the stirring orchestral themes for which the league’s film house is renowned. Sitting alone in an editing room on the postproduction wing of our New Jersey corporate campus, I shuffled through the clipped footage looking for the biggest, best collisions. Watching the hits in rapid, random succession, I’d use a keyboard to replay, pause, and fast-forward the frames of heavily padded players launching themselves at one another—the louder the crack, the better. As long as the player who had been blasted, annihilated, or jacked up didn’t crumple to the turf, unconscious, or writhe in obvious pain, I was in the clear. No dirty hits, no spearing, no headhunting, and no going for the knees; I looked for good, heads-up shoulder tackles.

MOST POPULAR
Brett Kavanaugh Has Already Disqualified Himself
Brett Kavanaugh Disqualified Himself From the Supreme Court
The Enduring Scam of Corporate Tax Breaks
The Man Standing Between Brazil and Authoritarianism
Terrorist By Association
Like this article?
Support our work.
Subscribe today.
Satisfied, I lined up the hit, punctuated it with a forceful note of music, and then lined up another, carefully judging hundreds of collisions, until I had enough hits to fill the minute of time required to delight my video-on-demand audience. I loved every millisecond of it.

I began working for the NFL in the late summer of 2004, less than a year before Nigerian-born pathologist Dr. Bennet Omalu published his controversial paper in the journal Neurosurgery on the brain of Mike Webster, the Hall of Fame center for the Pittsburgh Steelers and Kansas City Chiefs, who died in 2002. Omalu is the subject of both a recent book and film that share the same blunt title: Concussion. The book, by Jeanne Marie Laskas, expands on her reporting in the 2009 GQ exposé “Game Brain.” (The film, which stars Will Smith as Omalu, will be released by Sony Pictures this Christmas.) Omalu’s article described in detail his discovery that chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), an impact-based head trauma, was killing football players and other athletes who suffered repeated blows to the head. Three doctors with the NFL’s Mild Traumatic Brain Injury committee wrote a letter to the editors of Neuroscience alleging Omalu had misunderstood his own findings. But even as the NFL tried to bury his breakthrough, the doctor continued to accumulate data on what head trauma did to the brains of athletes until a former neurosurgeon for the Pittsburgh Steelers who had known Webster called Omalu to tell him he believed him. As Laskas wrote in GQ, “It was the first time anyone who ever had anything to do with the NFL had validated Omalu’s work.”

In Concussion, Laskas tells the story thoroughly, though not completely, of an immigrant who suddenly found himself in a unique position to tell America about itself. Omalu’s life, as well as his discovery, is at the center of Concussion, and rightfully so—his story allows us to understand that American football is both a sport and a mirror, one which reflects both glorious and grotesque truths about our national character. 


Mike Webster was the keystone of the first pro football team I ever loved, the Pittsburgh Steelers, playing the sport I still love the most. My mother and her family are from Pittsburgh, and even though I was born in their rival city of Cleveland, many of my baby clothes were black and gold. (I did eventually switch to my hometown Browns, committing myself to a lifetime of football disappointment that has built up more cholesterol than it has character.) Given that I’d grow up to become one of the sport’s mythmakers for a spell, it makes sense that some of the first numbers I could recite as a three-year-old in 1978 were not just one through ten, but also 12, 32, 82, 88, 58, 76, the jersey numbers of my favorite Steelers, who were then in the middle of a historic run of four Super Bowl championships.

“Iron Mike” wore number 52 during his time with the Steelers, and whenever he removed his black helmet, he revealed a shock of receding blond hair and a pair of sunken eyes. To a young boy in the 1980s in love with football, Webster recalled Darth Vader in the denouement of Return of the Jedi, his life-giving black helmet removed to reveal the broken man beneath. It was understandable; football players, after all, endure a lot of collisions; offensive linemen suffer them on virtually every play, and per a 2014 study published in the Journal of Neurotrauma, they stay on the field with more undiagnosed concussions than any other players in the game.

Get the latest from TNR. Sign up for the newsletter.
 “Football was one aspect of American life that Bennet had not keyed into particularly,” Laskas writes of Omalu, who had dreamed of America’s promise. A native of Nigeria’s Igbo tribe, Omalu had immigrated to the United States in 1994 at the age of 26 to study epidemiology at the University of Washington: “‘What an odd and inelegant game,’ he thought, to the extent he ever thought about it at all. ‘Guinea pigs bashing.’” I couldn’t put it better—bashing for the sake of a civic religion that swallows our faith and spits out the broken bones, torn ACLs, and bruised brains of its players.

Webster died in Pittsburgh on September 24, 2002, less than twelve years after playing his final game in the National Football League and nearly five years after being inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame. At the time, Webster was known more for the awful way he was living out his retirement: He was often homeless or sleeping in his truck with a garbage bag in place of one of the windows; he’d put Super Glue on his decaying teeth to keep them in his mouth, and felt he needed a Taser used on him just so he could sleep. Webster was often angry, confused, and deranged; his wife divorced him less than a year before he suffered a heart attack and died at the age of 50.

Omalu, who learned of Webster’s death on the news, requested access to his body through Webster’s lawyer, who had fought in vain for years to get his client a full disability allowance from the NFL. During the autopsy, Omalu discovered what he termed “chronic traumatic encephalopathy,” a degenerative disease brought on by repetitive head trauma that could result in the kind of mental and physical decline apparent in the final years of Mike Webster’s life. CTE sufferers become confused, endure memory loss—the “punch-drunk” description often given to boxers throughout the twentieth century—and develop dementia similar to Alzheimer’s. In September 2015, researchers with the Department of Veterans Affairs and Boston University released horrific findings: Out of the 91 NFL players they examined, 87 tested positive for CTE. Overall, they tested 165 players from every level, high school to the pros, and 79 percent of them tested positive.

