LASIK: Know the Rewards and the Risks
https://www.webmd.com/eye-health/news/20180727/lasik-know-the-rewards-and-the-risks

Dry eyes, glare, halos, and starbursts are all possible side effects of LASIK surgery. But some people may also get long-term complications like eye infections, vision loss, chronic pain, and detached retinas. If you knew that, would you still have the popular procedure? Some patients say they didn’t find out until it was too late and now wish they could turn back the clock.

According to Market Scope, around 10 million Americans have had LASIK surgery since it was first approved by the FDA in 1999. Around 700,000 LASIK surgeries are done each year, but that’s down from a peak of 1.4 million in 2000.

It remains one of the most popular elective surgeries in the country, and its satisfaction rating among patients who’ve had the procedure is remarkably high. Eric Donnenfeld, MD, a former president of the American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery, has successfully completed around 85,000 procedures over his 28-year career. He says that overall, 96% to 98% of LASIK patients end up with 20/20 vision. Forty percent to 50% end up with vision that is better than 20/20.

“Patients should pick a surgeon that they feel would turn them down as a patient if they weren’t a really good candidate,” he says. “Look for a surgeon who is selective about the patients they’re going to do surgery on. Look for a surgeon with a wealth of experience, a surgeon for whom LASIK is the easiest thing they do.”

Highly selective patients and highly selective surgeons will ultimately lead to better outcomes, says Kozarsky. Patients should be confident that their surgeon has their best interest in mind.

“LASIK can be used as a business. That’s a terrible thing to do. You’re not going to talk to your patients. It’s a second-rate way of selecting patients and doing the procedure,” he says.

Eye Problems After Surgery
For Jason Esveld, LASIK turned into an unexpected nightmare.

“I went in blissfully ignorant of what was really going on here,” says Esveld, 28. “I did my research when I bought a TV, but not when I decided to laser my eyes.”

In December 2016, about 4 days after having the surgery at what he now calls a “LASIK mill,” he had an unsettling pain in his right eye.

“It was a deep ache and sometimes like a sharp, hot sensation, like when you have an inflamed ankle after you roll it,” Esveld says. “I would have days when it was so severe that I was pretty much incapacitated. I couldn’t keep my eyes open because of the pain.”

With LASIK, which stands for laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis, lasers correct eyesight by reshaping tissue under the cornea, the round dome at the front of the eye. The doctor flattens the eye and cuts a flap to reshape the middle section of the cornea. The reshaping of the tissue changes the way light focuses in the retina, making your vision clearer. It can take up to 6 months for eyes to reach peak clarity and for some of the side effects to go away.

According to Donnenfeld, LASIK is the “safest, most effective procedure that’s ever existed in ophthalmology.” In his 28 years of practice, he says he has performed over 85,000 procedures with no patients who developed chronic corneal neuropathy. In fact, complications from LASIK eye surgery are extremely rare.

This was the case for Alessandra Bhansali. After having LASIK done nearly 6 years ago, Bhansali, 27, has nothing but praise for the surgery. She says that her eyes reached peak clarity within 3 days of the procedure.

“I don’t have to worry about contacts. It makes my routine faster,” she says. “It’s less of a hassle, and it’s really nice to be able to wake up and see everything. The surgery has made my life really convenient.”

According to the American Refractive Surgery Council, there are five key qualifications to look for in a surgeon:

The surgeon should be experienced, preferably with at least 10,000 successful surgeries performed.
Make sure the surgeon meets industry standards with their LASIK screening process.
Be comfortable with your surgeon. They should be eager to give informed answers to any questions you have.
You shouldn’t feel pressured to have LASIK done, and the consultation shouldn’t feel like a sales pitch.
Look out for surgeons who over-promise results. LASIK is intended to improve vision, not necessarily perfect it.
