An Overview of Allergies
https://www.verywellhealth.com/allergies-4014764

To most people, hearing "allergies" sounds harmless, but they are, in fact, among the most common reasons people visit the doctor. Depending on where you live, you can have symptoms year round, and when care is not sought, in some cases, they can even lead to life-threatening symptoms.
What Are Allergies?
Allergies are very common, but do you really know what they are?

Allergies are basically an abnormal immune system response against normally harmless substances. If you do not have allergies, exposure to a substance does not lead to the development of any allergic symptoms. However, the allergic person’s body reacts by releasing certain chemicals in response to the substance that ultimately leads to the development of symptoms.

Allergens are the substances that lead to the development of allergy symptoms.

Sensitization is a process where your immune system is exposed enough times to certain allergens that your body begins to make allergic antibodies to that particular substance. You do not develop symptoms the first time you’re exposed to an allergen in most cases, but with later exposures. Exposure leads your body to begin making allergic antibodies or IgE against these different allergens. Re-exposure of the allergen leads to the allergen binding to IgE cells and a cascade of events that ultimately result in the development of symptoms.

The allergy symptoms you experience depend somewhat on how you are exposed to allergens. Allergens that travel through the air and enter your body through breathing are more likely to cause respiratory and nasal symptoms, while allergens that you would ingest may lead to gastrointestinal or systemic symptoms.

Some allergens lead to minor, annoying symptoms, such as a runny nose. Other allergens can lead to severe symptoms, such as swelling of the neck and wheezing.

Living With Allergies
For very mild allergy symptoms, over-the-counter antihistamines may be all the treatment that is needed. However, be careful as some antihistamines can cause a significant amount of sedation.

You might also try a saline rinse or spray. This washes allergens out of your nose and provides you with relief of symptoms. Many patients like saline sprays because, unlike other nasal sprays and medications, they can be used as much and as frequently as you would like.

Many patients with newly diagnosed allergies sometimes feel that they can never go outside. However, if you have good treatment you should not have to totally avoid the outdoors. If over-the-counter medications are not providing you allergy relief, talk with your doctor about prescription medications to address your allergy symptoms. Your doctor may also want to consider allergy testing.

If you do start taking a prescription medication, make sure you take it as prescribed. Many times medication is less effective because patients take medication incorrectly or suffer side effects because they take too much.

Questions to Ask Your Doctor About Allergies
Could this be something else other than allergies? If you have done all of the things that your doctors asked or you continue to develop symptoms on treatment, it may be that you have another disease or condition that has allergy-like symptoms but isn’t really an allergy. Ask your doctor what other conditions might lead to your symptoms.
What are my triggers? As mentioned above, one of the key treatments for allergy symptoms is avoiding the allergens that lead to symptoms. If you cannot identify your allergy triggers, you will have a more difficult time controlling your allergies.
Can I try complementary or alternative treatments? Complementary and alternative medicine is increasingly being used by patients—often without discussing with their doctor. This can sometimes lead to dangerous interactions with other treatment medications or therapies. Most doctors are not opposed to complementary or alternative treatments for allergies, but your doctors do need to know that you’re on them or want to try them. Talk with your doctor before initiating any complimentary or alternative allergy treatment.
Will I have to take medication? For many allergies, over-the-counter treatments or lifestyle modifications may be sufficient. However, if you continue to have allergy symptoms you may benefit from prescription medication.
How do I take my medicine? It is very important that you understand the dose, frequency, and route of your medication. A medication that you need to spray into your nose may be ineffective and harmful if sprayed on to different parts of the body.
How can I learn more? Your doctor is a tremendous source of information about allergies. Ask your doctor for an information prescription that lets you know great places where you can get more information and educate yourself.
How often will I need to see you? Many times patients obtain a diagnosis, begin a treatment, but then are lost to follow up. Make sure you have an idea how often you need to see your doctor.