Fashionable fusion wear for preteens 
https://www.fibre2fashion.com/industry-article/7924/fashionable-fusion-wear-for-preteens

Guess what's spilling out of the preteen wardrobe? Preteens or tweens expect more out of their closet than the already-popular ethnic wear and western wear. Over the last few years, Indo-Western wear, an exciting amalgamation of Indian and western wear, has topped the popularity charts for Indian tweens. This clothing trend appeals to tweens as it lets them experiment with different styles, express themselves and look quirky yet stylish.

Flaunting Indo-Western fusionwear has become the thing in preteen fashion wear. To make sure that your tween wears it right, here are a few tips.

1. In-trend outfits

The best way to combine a fusion outfit is to mix and match various clothing options. One of the most sought after trends this season is the dhoti look.

Pair a dhoti with a funky, printed T-shirt and boys have a whole new look to flaunt. Similarly, girls can pair a dhoti with a printed or solid coloured T-shirt with a scarf and amp up their style quotient. The ensemble is easy to create, looks quirky and is comfortable to wear. The best part is, it works for both girls and boys.

2. The jacket jazz

Topping the fashion charts every season, jackets are the best fusion wear hack for both girls and boys. While boys can pair a khadi Nehru jacket with a kurta and distressed jeans, girls can rock this outfit with a silk shrug. The combination is a tried, tested and loved fashion trend in the fusion wear category.

3. Embroidered elegance

Nothing can go wrong while experimenting with embroidery. Girls can try the classic Indian thread embroidery or mirror work on western dresses to look stunning. Boys can pair a self-patterned kurta or Nehru jacket with funky prints to up the fashion quotient.

4. Drape a dupatta

Dupattas are one of the most sought-after apparel trends in fusion wear. The statement is high on fashion value and works for all seasons. Pair a trendy dupatta with a dress or skirt or even over denims for girls and see the magic. Boys can wear a tie-and-dye or printed shawl with T-shirts and jeans/pants to shore things up. Scarves come in a variety of colours and fabric options.

5. Artistic accessories

Accessories can add to the bling factor of any outfit. However, overdo of bling is not the right way to go, though. Tweens love to move freely and their outfit should not interfere. Girls can just add a set of small traditional earrings like jhumkas or balis, a tribal beaded neck piece or colourful bangles to give any western outfit an Indian look. Likewise, boys can flaunt a brooch on the jacket or a kada on the wrist for the desi flavour.

6. Flattering footwear

When nothing else is around, footwear serves as the best fusion wear hack. A vibrant pair of kohlapuri chappals or juttis can push up the style quotient in any girl's wardrobe. Similarly, boys can try a pair of Indian mojris with denims and kurta or T-shirt to rock the look.
