Do you know your Tax Reform Bonus?
https://medium.com/datadriveninvestor/corporate-america-got-theirs-do-you-know-your-tax-reform-bonus-cb510b24d73f
The S&P 500 today set its first all-time high since January.
Earnings growth is coming in at around +27% y/y.
Lower corporate tax rates contributed about 7% to growth according to analyst estimates.
Curious to see what the Tax Act did for you?
Setting aside politics, fiscal responsibility, economics, etc. to focus on the numbers of tax reform: nearly everyone we meet underestimates their 2018 Tax Reform “Bonus”.

Impact Labs created an app to demystify taxes. At https://TaxTips.app you can now calculate your annual Tax Reform Bonus in 30-sec.


Become tax-smart
Taxes can be the single-largest performance drag on investors?—?yes, in some cases, an even a bigger drag on performance than inflation or poorly managed and high-priced investment products.

Signed on Dec 22, 2017, we only had a few days to respond before year-end. We raced to help clients & friends save thousands of dollars in taxes each with last minute action-steps. Hopefully you did those too. Did you maximize that opportunity?

We would be happy to look at your current financial footprint in the context of your goals, tax profile, etc. to see if there is any help we might be able to offer.

In the meantime, we recommend exploring www.TaxTips.app to step up your knowledge of how TCJA (Tax Cuts & Jobs Act of 2017) impacts you.

About the Author:

Jason R. Escamilla, CFA is CEO of ImpactAdvisor LLC, a boutique Registered Investment Advisor based in San Francisco, serving individuals and corporate clients with advanced wealth management needs: high tax-bracket, custom-tailored portfolios, alternative investments, etc.

ImpactAdvisor LLC specializes in Modern Investing: Tax Smart + Socially-Selective?

Our average client has over $1M in investment assets. We have a waiting list for smaller accounts, but with the help of modern custom software, data, and design, we are working through the backlog.

This material has been provided to you for informational purposes only and should not be relied on for, tax, legal or financial advice.
The material is based on some reasonable factual and legal assumptions but does not contemplate complete consideration of all facts and circumstances of each individual situation. We encourage you to consult with your own tax, legal and financial advisors before engaging in any financial or tax planning or contact us to request a referral for any of the above-mentioned professional advisors.

Some or all alternative investment programs may not be suitable for certain investors. No clients of ImpactAdvisor LLC are automatically pre-qualified to receive information on alternative investment products.

The opinion and information provided are only valid at the time of publishing of this article. The material contained in this article is provided solely for educational purposes and does not constitute investment, legal, or tax advice, nor is it an offer to sell or a solicitation to buy any investment, investment process, strategy, or advice. It has been prepared without regard to the individual circumstances and objectives of persons who read it and may not be suitable for all individuals. The appropriateness of the particular advice, investment, or another strategy depends on a person’s or entities individual or specific circumstances. Past performance does not guarantee future results.