What are vertical markets and why are they important to the channel?
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/verticals-business-26157.html
If your business casts a wide net by making products or services that could appeal to almost anyone, you'll have a significant pool of potential customers but few specific ways to reach them. If your products or services appeal to a targeted niche, you'll have a smaller customer base but each potential customer will be more likely to buy. Business verticals are narrow markets whose specific needs make them especially likely to want your offerings.


 
Advantages of Vertical Markets
Vertical markets simplify your marketing work. When you know who your customers are -- what they want and where to find them -- you'll have an easier time crafting a message and choosing advertising venues. If you make food bars designed for the nutritional needs of lactating women, you can emphasize this difference from mainstream food bars and advertise on websites and in magazines targeted toward new mothers. If you start a vegan restaurant, you can easily find customers among health-conscious eaters and animal rights groups. Having a small, focused target market also makes it easier to leverage word of mouth advertising. Vegans often hang out with other vegans and, if your food is appealing, then certainly, they'll be talking about your restaurant. The narrow focus of your customer base is also an advantage when developing new products. Having a clearly defined target market makes it easier to understand what your customers want and buy.

Disadvantages of Vertical Markets
Although appealing to a vertical market makes it easier to find and reach your customers, it also limits the number of available customers you can potentially reach. If you start a restaurant that specializes in recreating medieval meals, you may find a clear target market among food historians, but there may not be enough of them to keep your enterprise afloat. Target markets can shift, as well. This is especially true in the diet industry. Products designed for the Ornish or Atkins diets of the late 1990's would certainly find themselves with fewer customers once these diets went out of style -- and products targeted toward the contemporary Keto diet may very well meet a similar fate.


 
Defining Vertical Markets
Although initially you might not have set out to create a business that appeals to a vertical market, it's likely that your company does cater to one or more verticals. It's useful to take a step back and define the vertical market most likely to use your products and services. This perspective will help you focus your marketing, and will help you target future products and features toward the customers most likely to want what you offer.