The indulgence factor: trends in frozen and refrigerated dairy desserts
https://www.dairyfoods.com/articles/93106-the-indulgence-factor-trends-in-frozen-and-refrigerated-dairy-desserts
To appeal to today’s consumers, producers of refrigerated and frozen desserts are creating products with premium and simple ingredients, often in convenient and single-serve formats. But they also need to meet consumers’ desire for indulgence


Consumers still love eating ice cream and other frozen and refrigerated desserts, but now many are looking for cleaner versions of their favorite treats. Alongside this, even those who desire to eat healthfully still don’t want to give up the indulgence factor.

Even many of America’s healthiest eaters give into indulgences based on their emotional states, according to Foodmix Marketing Communications, Elmhurst, Ill., a full-service food branding agency. A study by Foodmix revealed that 40% of U.S. food-brand lovers who rated their daily diet as extremely healthy agreed with the statement, “When I’m feeling down, I eat something indulgent to make me feel better.”  

Despite the fact that many Americans are trying to eat more healthfully, the findings show that America’s love affair with indulgent foods has reached even the most disciplined group of eaters, Foodmix said.

“It’s likely that members of this group need to give themselves ‘permission’ to indulge and may, in fact, turn indulgence food into a sort of self-care,” Foodmix said.

Nearly all consumers purchase frozen treats, especially ice cream, yet growing purchase and consumption frequency often presents challenges for indulgent categories, said Chicago-based Mintel in its April 2018 “Ice Cream and Frozen Novelties — U.S.” report. Frozen treats with hints of wholesome ingredients and healthy notes conveyed through product claims and real ingredients may allow consumers to more frequently consume them with less guilt, Mintel said.

Alexandra Chamberlain, managing director, Pots & Co., USA, San Francisco, said consumers still want to indulge, but they also want to know their treats don’t contain things such as preservatives, artificial colors or flavors, palm oil and corn syrup.

“Instead, they want only the best, simple ingredients that they would find in their cupboard at home,” Chamberlain said.

 

Cold dairy desserts by the numbers
U.S. demand for ice cream and frozen desserts is forecast to total 7.6 billion pounds in 2022, according to “Ice Cream & Frozen Desserts: United States,” a June 2018 report from The Freedonia Group, Cleveland. Advances will continue to reflect strong marketing efforts and new product introductions over the forecast period, according to the report.

These new product introductions will need to address consumers’ desire for healthier, yet still indulgent desserts.

“A growing preference for natural, less processed and convenient food has reshaped the frozen category as consumers moved from shopping center-store aisles, including frozen desserts, and moved to shop the store’s perimeter, said Rebecca Leinenbach, vice president of marketing/communications for Prairie Farms Dairy Inc., Edwardsville, Ill. “The good news is that volume growth for the frozen food category turned positive for the first time in five years during Q1 2018.”

While sales within the frozen desserts category have been declining, ice cream and novelty sales have fared better than the frozen category overall, Leinenbach said.

Indeed, according to data from Chicago-based market research firm IRI, the ice cream/sherbet category saw dollar sales increase 2.2% to $6.9 billion and unit sales climb 1.6% to 1.8 billion during the 52 weeks ending April 22, 2018. Compare this to the frozen desserts and topping category, which saw dollar sales drop 2.0% to $678.3 million and unit sales fall 4.5% to 259.8 million during the 52 weeks ending June 17, 2018.

Things look a little more promising for the refrigerated dessert side. The refrigerated desserts category, made up of refrigerated pudding, mousse, gelatin and parfaits, saw dollar sales increase 1.4% to $729.9 million during the 52 weeks ending June 17, 2018. Unit sales improved even more, up 4.8% to 377.5 million. Faring even better, the cheesecakes category enjoyed a 6.7% dollar sales increase to $306.7 million. And unit sales jumped 16.9% to 51.1 million.

Looking ahead
Now is the time for frozen and refrigerated dessert companies to innovate. 

“Despite shifts toward healthier lifestyles, consumers are still active and interested in the [ice cream and frozen novelties] category, suggesting that indulgence is still in fashion,” Mintel said. “Yet consumers have some fairly strong habits — in consumption frequency and product selection — that require disruption to grow the category. Interest in further innovation suggests that consumers want to break these habits and seek permission to indulge more, yet on their own terms.”   
